I'm Wesley Morris. I'm a critic at the
New York Times. And a few weeks ago, I
had a free moment during the NBA
playoffs and I flipped over to C-SPAN,
which that's a conversation for another
time. But when I did it, there was Pete
Budajage.
Don't I feel welcome here? Thank you so
much. He was doing a town hall in Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, and I was watching him
hold court, and that got me to thinking
that that that
gayness has never been in Wilder
territory. And by wild, I just mean
normal or basic, but also complex in its
basicness. Watching him on C-SPAN,
though, what I was really thinking about
was how many ways there are right now to
be a kind of I don't know, regular gay.
There's of course the classic I'm coming
out. There's out and loud. There's out
and quiet. There's outish. There's is he
out. There are more outgay men in the
MAGA movement than there are in men's
professional sports. Trump's agenda is
about making America a normal country.
Like I said, wild times. The day after I
watched Mary Pete though, I read a
thoughtful, rangy essay by the critic
Mark Harris that ran in the Times T
magazine that argues that closet culture
was essentially kind of back. And I was
like, oh no, it is. His jumping off
point is Pee-Wee as Himself, a new HBO
documentary about Paul Rubin, the
performance artist best known for being
Peewee Herman, the very popular
avanguard host of the Saturday morning
TV show's Playhouse.
If you found him later, you probably
remember him more for a couple of
careering scandals.
But no matter how you think about him,
this documentary has the potential to
redefine and expand your understanding
of him. In the documentary, Ruben comes
out as publicly gay, but he died in 2023
and until this documentary had been
closeted for most of his life. Mark's
essay traces an entire mini history of
the closet's tragic function in American
culture. He writes, "It turns out that
Reuben's, a figure of irrepressible joy
as Peewee, felt that he was harboring a
dark secret. And decades later, he found
himself trying to explain not
homosexuality, but a lifetime of
concealment, a lifetime in the closet.
I don't want to come off like a victim
in some way. I kept who I was a secret
for a really long time. I hid behind an
alter ego." Today's secret word is fun.
All these different emotions, all these
different influences and factors.
I was like a good vessel
for it all. So, I wanted to talk to Mark
about the state of being out. And if I
can think of scores of very prominent
gay people of all genders, is the closet
even the right way to think about where
we are right now? If who's gay is still
information we crave, and I think it is,
is it information we deserve? Mark's
been writing about entertainment culture
and its legacies for a long time. He's
the author of some essential Hollywood
histories, Five Came Back, Pictures at a
Revolution, and he's also written what I
think is the definitive biography of the
director, Mike Nichols. He's also
working on a history of gay popular
culture, and he and I used to write
criticism together for Grantland. Well,
not together, but we did do it alongside
each other. This is the most important
part. I love reading his work, and I'm
glad you stopped by.
[Music]
Mark, welcome to this show.
Thank you, Wesley. It's great to be
here.
Um, what were you like in college when
PeeWee's Playhouse was happening?
Yeah, probably in college. Yeah.
Did it seem cool? Did it seem lame?
Totally. It was one of those things. No,
totally cool. Not lame at all. It was
one of those things like where you would
get high and watch it on Saturday
morning.
You were one of those
a little bit. Um but
you you'd watch it with people who got
it
like the way you got it. Um and and that
wasn't everybody. You know, there was a
big core of people who would be like,
"Why would you watch a Saturday morning
kids show?" Well, because this one is
special and this guy is special and he
like, you know, because it's it's this
weird combination of uh incredibly
innocent humor. I mean, it was never
smirky about talking to kids, you know,
and and one of the lovely things about
the the Pee-Wee documentary is that you
get how seriously Paul Rubin took that.
I mean, he really did feel that that he
had a responsibility as a children's
entertainer
and he knew he was transmitting
something,
right? Um, I read this piece that you
wrote and I watched this documentary
and I
really came away from it thinking that
Paul Rubin's was a very particular kind
of closet case
where he makes this choice to
essentially
focus on his work because he assumes
that coming out of the closet is going
to mean or like remaining openly gay is
going to inhibit his opportunities to
sort of practice his art,
right? Which is, I think, not something
that we can dismiss because when we're
talking about this decision, we're
talking about basically the early to mid
1980s
when the landscape was incredibly
different than it is now for um the very
very small handful of uh gay people in
entertainment who were even considering
coming out. And for Reuben's there's
this other factor which is essentially
even though Peewee spoke to many
different audiences in many different
ways
simultaneously.
Yes. But I think it's important to note
that he wanted to be a children's
entertainer among other things. Peewee's
Playhouse was a Saturday morning show.
As many knowing adults tuned in, so did
a lot of kids. And I think his baseline
belief that an openly gay
star of a liveaction Saturday morning
kids show was not viable at the time
that he made his decision was probably
correct.
Yeah. I just I was surprised by how
clear he is in his understanding that
that was the choice he was making like
like from the vantage of a person who at
this point was decades beyond the height
of his fame and had presumably time to
consider his choices.
Yes. And also had time to um consider
his own mortality. I mean, when when
Paul Rubin's uh participated in this
documentary, it's pretty clear that he
already knew he had cancer, he was
living with it for about 6 years before
he died. So, so this is a man who knows
that he doesn't have infinite time
rolling before him. And he's very, this
is one of the things that moved me so
much. He's very undefensive. He's very
matterof fact. He's like, "This is the
choice I made. I wasn't a victim.
The choice had a cost. I'm aware of what
the cost was. I didn't know what the
full cost would be when I made the
choice. Here I am now toward the end of
my life looking back at it.
I mean, I think that in a way you can
appreciate Reuben's thinking through his
life in this particular way as as a
useful
for example of the the tradeoffs, right,
that certain people make in order to
continue to work. um he was in a
relationship with a man for for a number
of years,
right? I mean, this was probably when
Reuben was in his 20s and and had gone
to Cal Arts and was a like more of a
kind of avantgard/performance
artist and he was, you know, he was
ambitious. He was trying to forge his
own identity. It seems that maybe his
boyfriend at the time was a little ahead
of him in that in that development. And
you know, one thing I think is probably
the case, the movie doesn't um fully get
into this, but but I try to talk about
it in the piece a little um if you're in
the strange place where you say, "Okay,
I'm going to go back in the closet or
okay, I'm not going to come out, you
think of it maybe as a decision with the
words for now implied in brackets,
like you're just going to come back to
you're going to reverse your decision or
like at some point you'll get stable
enough
or comfortable enough to be able to to
then be out
like let's put a pin in this whole gay
thing and we'll come back to it later.
Right.
I don't think you think of it as a
lifetime decision or or a decision that
is going to have ramifications that roll
down through years and decades. And yet
here is Paul Rubin's in this documentary
decades later um saying that yes, this
had real long-term consequences.
So wait, can you just walk through what
what Paul Rubin says about going back in
the closet in the documentary?
Sure. In the documentary, we learn from
Paul Rubin's that when he was a student
at uh Cal Arts, which was probably early
1970s, he met and fell in love with a
slightly older man named Guy who was
also an artist.
I should say in the film there are a
couple photos of Guy from Reuben's
personal photos and home movies. And he
is a handsome negro,
very handsome. And apparently according
to Reuben's uh the inspiration for a
couple of uh PeeWee's verbal ticks
exality,
but this was at a time when when Paul
Rubin was not Peewee Herman yet and and
didn't know what he was going to be. So
they moved in together. They lived
completely openly. this was serious
enough so that Reubin's introduced Guy
to his family and then it broke up for I
think very normal reasons back in the
that era which is you know Guy was a
little bit ahead of Paul Rubin I'm
calling him Guy because we don't know
his last name and um Ruben was trying to
establish his own career and get started
and felt that he was living too much um
in someone else's shadow
just regular relationship problems
exactly Sometime around then, Reuben's
just makes the decision. He's not in a
relationship or anything like that. He
just makes the decision that he's going
to go back in the closet. Those are his
words because he calls it I I I think a
decision made out of uh self-hatred and
self-preservation.
Yeah.
Um
very striking.
Yeah. It's a it's a tough and painful
thing to hear him say, but that's that's
the decision that he makes.
You're a journalist. You've practiced
journalism before. Do you think this
film works? Like I mean there are just
so many opportunities or so many moments
in this film where I I felt like an
opportunity was missed to ask another
question, you know. Does the movie work
for you? I do think it works because
because I think any um I think it's
almost in the nature of a really good
documentary profile to leave you with a
little bit of but what about this and I
want to know more about that. This tells
you a lot. I mean it works on the level
of you have a picture of Paul Rubin's um
the way he thinks as Paul Rubin's not as
peewee. the way he talks, the way he
crafts things that you didn't have
before. Although
that's true.
Although, yes, I think all of us who are
gay who watch it have a lot. Okay. So,
when did you actually decide this and
what did that decision look like? And
and
how did it feel to have decided it,
right? Although one thing that I think
is sort of clear is I mean a lot of Paul
Rubin's friends and associates say we
didn't really know or he never talked
about it or so it was not as if he was
showing up places with boyfriends and
there was this large circle of people
who who knew. It's it's like I I think
the wide world of people that he got to
know after making this decision
um was sort of in the dark about it.
Mhm.
I'm really struck by the thing that I'm
I'm trying to think through in a in a in
a sense which is that
this really is a particular case of of
maybe one because I mean there are many
artists in whose art in some way is
reflective of of their identity but
there's also something really
touching about Paul Rubin's
choosing to closet himself
um or go into a closet um in order to to
practice his art. And the art that he
winds up making, the person he winds up
becoming for most of his career is this
very flamboyant,
what should we do now?
Exuberant,
I know. Let's go look at my toys.
Child man called Peeweee Herman. And so
much of of this persona
involves a kind of gayness, right?
Involves something that that that you
can recognize as as being
somehow queer. Is there anything to be
said about
I don't even know if it's irony. I think
it's like it's a it felt like another
form of control for him. Well, one thing
I think is really interesting about uh
the the whole pee-wee persona is that it
takes one of the earliest homophobic
tropes about gay men, which is that they
get stalled somewhere in uh before full
manhood and just decide to live in that
kind of playful place without ever kind
of growing up and becoming real men. It
takes that and it owns it. I mean, and
and of course, there's a whole gay
history of and that continues now um of
taking stuff that is used against you by
people who don't like you and making it
your own. And and I think that's one
thing that uh Paul Rubin did that was
legible in PeeWee's Playhouse and in
Peewee's Big Adventure to gay audiences
that might have passed straight over the
heads or alongside the heads of of uh of
Peewee's big straight followership. You
know, there are moments in PeeWee's Big
Adventure where there's this whole
sequence um with his girlfriend. Her
name is Daddy. Elizabeth Daly plays her
and there's just this winking teasing on
his part. She's just playing the
girlfriend role, right? She kind of is a
little mystified by what's going on with
him, but she's like also like us
mesmerized by him. And yet he's doing
this this winky peekab-boo dance.
Look, Daddy, I like you.
Like I like you.
That's the thing. I like you, too.
Daddy,
there's a lot of things about me you
don't know anything about, daddy.
He's basically telling her, "You're
never going to know who I am,
right?
You're never going to get to the bottom
of me. I'm just a mystery."
And and you know, he he builds it up. He
I think he says, you know, there there
are things about me you you wouldn't
know. things things you couldn't know.
And then practically like turning to the
audience and winking, he says
things you shouldn't understand.
And he's doing this as a way of um
brushing her off because he he he
doesn't want a girlfriend clinging to
him and he doesn't want the obligations
of a boyfriend. And and the minute he
disappoints her and leaves and is out of
her sight, he like giggles and laughs
and shakes his head because he knows
he's pulled it off. That's an amazing
like if you're gay and you're watching
that, you can't possibly miss what he's
playing with. I mean, and I guess this
is sort of getting to an aspect of what
I wanted to think through with you a
little bit, which is at that point when
the art is so playful and pungent and
and and winking and and transmissive,
do we need the artist himself to make a
declaration about who he is?
That's a really hard question. I
do. We as a public need it, I guess, is
the question. Do we need it in the sense
that we cannot enjoy what Paul Rubin did
without it? Manifestly not. I mean, you
know, people people loved him. And if
you didn't get what he was playing with
in that scene, or if you didn't get what
was being played with in the scene where
he dresses up as as a an escaped
convict's wife to evade a police
roadblock and then after they get
through the police roadblock, he sort of
forgets to take the costume off and just
sort of sits there, you know, in his
little fantasy head. or if you didn't
get the scene where he marches over to
the house of his arch rival Francis um
who who lives in a big mansion and will
not see him and his uh sort of houseman
says he's taking a bath right now and
and Pee says oh have they finished
hosing him down like if you didn't get
that that what's being played there is a
kind of like campy thing that's
right out of like Maim and Vera Charles
you can still like the movie,
right? Oh, I thought you were going to
go somewhere else, but like there's
something wrong with you. There's
something very wrong with you if you're
not picking up what PeeWee's putting
down. I actually think it might be
useful to think about I want to like I
want to stay in the world of what the
work is is doing. He knew something was
coming through and some of it was
explicit like I am directly addressing
the camera and I'm talking to you kids.
But a lot of it was just the the
ambiguity that you're you're sort of
articulating about what Peewee even is.
Like where developmentally is he? He's
both and he's neither nor. Um I mean I
really did as a kid think of him as a
kind of Pinocchio.
I think that's a great analogy. I really
do. First of all, we never really know
what Peewee is. Is he an adult? Is he a
child? He He lives on his own, but he
lives in this magical toy world.
This is weirdly a show about doors
opening, portals, tunnels, people going
in and out through. I mean, doors are
always shutters opening and closing.
This is to me the pe the the playhouse
was was the closet that Paul Rubin put
himself in. It's just that we spend his
career on the other side of that door.
That's that's really fascinating. And I
think what you're saying is really true,
but none of this is to say like, see,
being in the closet is great. No. Um,
you know,
I'm not I am not saying being in the
closet is great.
Yeah. Hi. If anyone's listening on
social media, let me just make it clear
that I am not advocating the closet. Um,
but it it there is at the same time
something uh incredibly charming and
very pee-weeish about the very concept
of a secret language, you know, um,
and all of the stuff that he did as
Peewee was steeped in that and and
connects to a larger part of the history
of gay culture where things had to be
encoded, you know, often for legal
reasons. And so there was a long time,
many, many decades when gay people took
that necessity and turned it into a
whole fascinating arcane set of uh
references and double meanings and winks
and winks and and um almost initiations.
The more you um learned this language,
the more you could be welcomed into this
slightly secret society. And and so when
people like I I I I've heard some people
say directly to me, well, isn't it kind
of incredibly unsemly to advocate
nostalgia for the closet? The closet is
not anything that I feel nostalgic
about. What I do think a lot of gay men
of a certain set of generations feel
nostalgic about is the incredibly
vibrant culture that grew out of
the frustrations of the closet.
I mean, if anything, what he had were
were great closet role models, right?
like particular and I what I mean by
great is the the the artists themselves
were great and the ways in which they
conveyed
their
sexual orientation. Um what I'm going to
for the purposes of this conversation
call gayness is is really apparent. Um I
mean he would have had Liberace
um as a per as a known person. he would
have been aware of people like Rock
Hudson and to a less obvious extent
maybe Van Johnson. I'm just sort of
going through all my closeted but but
but like legibly gay. Um
and then when he was a teenager like
watching TV, it would be more like um
Paul Lind on Bewitched as Uncle Arthur.
Yeah, she wanted more milk.
What's wrong with getting it from the
refrigerator? I never milked a
refrigerator.
Or like not the actor, but the character
of um Dr. Smith on Lost in Space.
And and this is one really weird thing
about the ' 60s is that um pop culture
tended to decouple male homosexuality
from sex. uh it it what what what people
saw that that signal to them that a
character was uh gay wasn't
attraction to men. It was this whole set
of weird traits that
an ascot,
right? An ascot, a a mincing walk, a a
literal limp wrist, uh a kind of
sense of humor, uh sometimes even a
weird voice. So then you get a Pee-Wee
who like is a man who doesn't exactly
act like a man, but he doesn't act like
anyone.
I know you are, but what am I?
You're a nerd.
You're an idiot.
I know you are, but what am I?
I know you are, but what am I? And and I
think when we're talking about Paul
Rubin's closetedness, we we should make
the distinction that um he didn't
publicly present himself as
heterosexual. You know, he didn't
disavow his sexuality. He just didn't
address it at all. I wanted to throw in
one other thing cuz I think it's
important to say gay history is really
fast. It's really compressed. I know
that
you mean the window of of time in which
it is happening. Yes.
Um, sometimes it can seem agonizingly
slow and frustrating as we live it. But
really what has happened from Stonewall
in 1969 to now is so astonishing that
um, we don't always pay attention to one
consequence of it, which is that gay
generations are really compact. They're
not like straight generations. I I was
born in 1963.
If I were 5 years older, I might not be
here.
You know, that that's what a difference
um my date of birth made uh visav the
AIDS crisis. If I were 5 years younger,
I might have started to learn about AIDS
in middle school.
You know, it's it's that consequential.
Paul Rubin's if he were alive now, would
be 72. So when we think about his
decisions and we think about his
choices, we we have to, as hard as it
can be for younger people to do this, we
have to try to put ourselves in the
heads of someone who was born in the
early 1950s and and grew up with those
social restrictions and mores.
I mean, I'm going to say this and you're
going to laugh because it's going to
sound really just too much, but like
what does the end of the rainbow look
like?
like is there an end? Should there be an
end? And because I'm I'm just I don't
know. I do think these stories are
important and I think they're important
in art. Um but I but I'm also at a point
where I'm wondering if I'm tired of
seeing that iteration of it. Uh but I
also understand its sort of moral and
political value.
Right? I mean, I remember like in the
early to mid 90s when I first started
writing about um and helping shape
stories about uh LGBT issues. Um there's
a lot of talk about uh movie stars
coming out or not coming out and what
what the magical finish line would look
like for
the coming of outs.
Yes.
Who is going to shatter the glass? Who's
going to break the closet? Who's going
to destroy it?
The finish line was always created in
order for gay people not to be able to
get to it. Like it's it's um you know,
it wasn't the dream, it was the
impossible dream. So, you know, the like
in the '9s, for instance, the name that
would um uh come up over and over again
was Tom Cruz. Not because everybody
thought Tom Cruz was gay or not only
because some people thought Tom Cruz was
gay, wanted him to be gay, whatever. It
was because Tom Cruz was the pinnacle of
movie stardom. And so people would say
when a Tom Cruz can come out
and still play
uh a viable heterosexual
star and still be an action star, then
and only then will we know that we have
won. And and of course, like what
fascinates me about that is there's
nothing that says that that's the finish
line. Why wasn't, you know, why why
couldn't, you know, no one was saying
like when two young stars will uh star
in a gay love story um and that movie
will become widely acclaimed and a
popular box office hit and a best
picture nominee like Brock Mountain.
Like that's as much of a finish line as
anything you could contrive about a
stars coming out. But the interesting
thing to me about the Tom Cruz example,
especially when it came from gay people,
um, like we were all limited by our
imagination in the 1990s because all we
could think of as like the great
accomplishment would be someone who had
been in the closet for a really long
time suddenly announcing that he was
gay, which of course
is much more complicated and messy than
what we increasingly have now, which is
um young stars identifying as gay or
lesbian or queer or by or trans or other
from the beginning of their careers.
That was something that we weren't even
very good at imagining in the '9s
because we were so connected then to the
question of the closet
that we couldn't imagine a universe in
which the closet itself was a slightly
one.
Yeah. Like it was an outmoded concept.
I just keep a jacket in this closet. My
sexuality is just in me. I don't put it
anywhere else. I I But I But so are we
past that though? Are we I mean I think
you've identified and I would agree with
you that generationally,
you know, we are now with a set of
generations that no longer think this
way, right? where
the idea of a closet isn't even this
kind of laughable and it's much more
normal for people to just not declare a
sexual orientation because it's their
business.
To answer your question,
yes, we are past it now and we are also
not there yet and we are also right in
it. It's
the impossible dream.
It's never one thing. I mean, you know,
Kristen Stewart, for instance, marrying
her uh girlfriend
is not something that uh people really
could have imagined
40 years ago. Inconceivable.
Reality will always ultimately outstrip
your imagination. And yet, have we hit
the equivalent of the
coming out in midcareer of a um Tom Cruz
level male action movie star? No, we
haven't. But maybe what that means is uh
we should stop looking at an early '90s
model for what success would mean.
Well, I also think that the the movie
business is making it really easy for us
to not think that way anymore. Right.
Right. I mean, but like there is no
there's no culturally hegemonic force
that is like making it so that we can
only see one paradigm as being the thing
that's going to shatter the mold in
terms of how coming out and being openly
gay would even work,
right? And what even it like coming out
as what
is a is a new that's a that's a you know
21st century question um uh using a 20th
century framework because because if you
you know for instance come out as queer
using that word um you are both
announcing that you are in the category
of something other than completely
heteros heterosexual. And for many
people,
you're making a statement that uh
invites further questions. Yes.
Because coming out can mean anything
from I'm gay, but I prefer the word
queer or I'm lesbian, but I prefer the
word queer to uh you know, I haven't but
I would I might to I'm something else to
I'm not going to talk about what I am.
it. I mean, two years from now, I might
use a different word to uh describe
myself. Um, I think young people now are
very very comfortable with that with
with coming out uh being a way of saying
at this moment that I'm saying this,
this is where I am in my journey as a
sexual being.
It's not fixed. It's not binary. It's
not a box. It's a spectrum. It's fluid.
It could change at any minute. and don't
I'm not falling for your little traps.
Right? And for people, you know, my age,
there's a temptation and I think it's a
temptation we should resist, but I also
understand it to say, "Oh, come on."
Like, you know, you're you're really
like you're leaving all of your options
open. it, you know, like this is, but
this this is the danger, I think, of
being an older uh gay person is is that
you can start resenting
um that
uh the thing you wanted uh has come
true, which is that it's easier for
people in some ways now than it was for
you and that they have more options and
opportunities than you did. And you
know, we have to really like fight that
at all cost. You know, there are so many
examples of people and this is this
might be what we're talking about with
with there are a lot of models in play,
right? For example, I think we have
people out here like using, you know, a
particular kind of old paradigm of the
way we think about this. Like Queen
Latifah has never officially declared
herself to be out, has never said, "Hey
everybody, here's my deal." But whose
deal is quite it seems evident to me
like I don't need her to say the words
because I can I'm I'm literate. I can
read. I mean she's all but affinityized
her relationship to the community,
right? Like she is happy prided on
national television. She doesn't misstep
in those in that realm. She doesn't seem
like she's she's not in the closet.
She's not not out, but she's outish.
Right. I I always think of Jodie Foster
in this regard because I think of her
speech at the 2013 Golden Globes when
she sort of said, "I never needed to
come out because I still believe in
privacy and I believe that you don't
have to like make an announcement of
everything." But she said that in a
golden closed
speech. If you had been a public figure
from the time that you were a toddler,
if you'd had to fight for a life that
felt real and honest and normal against
all odds, then maybe then you too might
value privacy above all else. Privacy,
right?
Windexing her glass closet.
So, but but at the same time, there is
no way that that speech did not
constitute coming out and she knew it.
And now, um she's out. I mean, she's
very out. She thanks her wife. She's
she's completely out and and
I mean if you want to be sort of really
zealous uh
about it, you can say and you can see
her comfort in her life in her acting
now. Like she she's in a she's in a more
open, more comfortable place and and
it's fantastic. But but I always think
of that speech as like a
one of the real torture experiences for
me as a viewer. like this person was
suffering in doing the thing like that.
To me that speech was proof that it is
it's hard for everybody to do it.
Yes. Exactly.
It's hard for everybody.
Exactly. Like I I was in the room when
she made that speech and I really had
trouble processing it in the moment. I
was
That sentence does not diagram Mark.
I was uncomfortable. I mean, it was it
was unnerving um because you you you did
see someone like getting a lifetime
achievement award um and her clear
frustration at navigating this issue
spilled out and was there
evident struggle. But that was one of
those moments for me where I actually
watched that thinking, if it's this hard
for this person to do this in front of
millions and millions of people, do we
need to know?
If we say yes, we need that then. Well,
if we
which you're kind of saying a little
bit, right?
Yeah. But need can really shade quickly
into by any means necessary. If we need
it, then can't we out this person? uh
because because I if if it's a need,
it's a must. It's mandatory. I guess
theoretically the the queer utopia would
always include people who like famous
people who did not feel the need to
identify. Um but I guess I don't
entirely believe in that utopia. Maybe
that's a product of my um generation.
Yeah, I think this is one one place
where it's really useful to talk about
trans people visav coming out because um
I don't think we'd have a discussion
about well do trans people need this.
The answer is yes, desperately. Um uh
and and it it doesn't really need
explaining why and and nor do the
incredible costs and risks of doing that
need explaining. I mean, it's it it you
know, to put yourself on the line
publicly as a trans person now, uh is to
really um risk something.
Your life. Yes.
Your life.
Your life. Um I think I would be wary of
drawing a distinction in in terms of
saying um
yeah, we don't really need it from gay
people or bisexuals or lesbians anymore,
but we do need it from trans people. Um,
if we're gonna say we need it,
we need the whole alphabet to be out.
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
I also think that we
might have gotten to the end of the
rainbow and there are people who are
like nearing it and being like, "Oh, I
can see people down at the bottom of the
arch. You know what? They got it. I I'm
just going to I'm just going to step
back. I'm not going back in the closet,
but I I don't need to be out here saying
what I am or what I'm what I'm not. I'm
just going to like just be comfortable
in my privacy. I don't want to be
obligated to like show up at, you know,
parades and I don't want to do Pride
Month. I I don't want to have to post a
flag. I I don't want to do anything. I
just want to live my life. And as a as a
personally proud
queer person,
um,
so I'm just going to I'm going to let
the people at the at the bottom of the
rainbow do the work.
Well, you know,
that's what I thought. Like it's just
too hard or it's too much to do right
now. I, professional football player, am
not even going to bother coming out
because you know what? It's just going
to be too much work. You know, that is
everybody's right except I would say for
actively homophobic politicians who I do
ethically believe should be outed. But
but but if you do that, don't don't say
you're living your life proudly, you
know. Um you you might imagine you are,
but what you're doing is living your
life conveniently. Um, you know, you
don't you don't get to you don't you
don't get to sort of claim the spoils
uh of popular success while
omitting a huge piece of who you are
from your public account of yourself and
say you're living proudly. I mean, th
this issue goes back a really long way.
And almost everyone I knew who came out
in the 80s or '9s um had this little
moment after coming out where they felt
like they had to differentiate
themselves from their new community.
It's like, well,
okay, what does that look like?
Well, it looks like, you know, in the in
the 80s or 90s, what it looked like was,
okay, well, I'm out. I'm gay, but like
I'm not going to dance on a float at a
pride parade or I'm not going to wear
this or I don't have to like this kind
of music or I don't have to go to those
clubs or you know it was it's this
moment this transitional moment when
you're you're like a little gay guppy or
whatever where you start realizing that
um coming out is the beginning of your
story and that you still have to figure
out a ton about who you are. You are
speaking my language, Mark Harris,
because I was just thinking about this
after I read your piece. I had never
thought this before, but it occurred to
me because I was just thinking about how
I was going to talk to you and I
remembered, I don't know about you, but
I came out to a bunch of straight
people.
Coming out is not like you don't open a
door one day and there you are
surrounded by all these like loving,
supportive, you know, gay people. You
got to find those people,
right? Like it is a process for like
look for all I know people now m maybe
some people do it with like a to all
email or a Tik Tok or or something where
it's like out all at once but for a lot
of us back then. Um you kind of
subdivided things that way like there's
your friends, there's your family.
Who did you come out to? Um, I think the
first person I came out to was um a I
came out late. I came out like in my
late 20s and and so
I was seven I was 20 20.
Okay.
Yeah. Um, a and and I also had a
slightly unusual coming out in that I
was not living a gay life before I like
I hadn't gone on a date with a guy even
before I came out, let alone kissed a
guy.
And you knew?
I knew.
Okay.
Oh, yeah. I mean, on some level I knew
since I was a teenager, but I had a long
rough journey wrestling with it and I
had relationships with women and so it
was complicated. Um, so the first person
I came out to I think was my former
college roommate.
Um, and then you know after that it was
it was a sequence. my gay friend at
work, my straight friend at work, my uh
like the most sympathetic member of my
family, then the next more difficult
member of my family, my my current
friends, my you know, you you I think
you figure out or you did at least back
when I did it, you figure out sort of
organically
what order feels right to you to talk to
people about this and as it goes on and
rolls on, it gets easier. But we should
note um that that you know some people
never get all the way to the um end of
the finish line. There's there you maybe
you don't want to come out at work
because that you work in a particular
place where it could cause an issue for
you or maybe you have that one uh
elderly relative uh about whom some
other relative says, "Oh, it would kill
her." Um, and you were like, "Well, I
don't want to kill someone, so maybe
I'll just, you know, let that be."
I definitely would just be like, "Hey,
I'm Mary."
Guess what?
Are you sitting down?
Stand up.
Right. Um, but but everybody like works
out their own narrative, like their own
order for how they're going to do this.
And and also I I do want to point out
that that that phase that I was talking
about, that phase where you want to kind
of differentiate
yourself from the pack, um
if if you're healthy, that is just a
phase. And you eventually realize that
yeah, you by coming out you are
announcing yourself as part of a
community that is full of people who are
not at all like you and people who are
somewhat like you and people who are a
lot like you, but but you don't get to
say like which parts of the community
you think are worthy and which parts you
don't and you know.
Yeah, but Mark, that's going to happen
anyway. Like you go to Province Town,
you can see the nomenclatures breaking
each other down as you walk down
Commercial Street.
Completely.
Completely. And like
that's that's a right of the community.
Yeah. And hopefully like the more
comfortable you get with your own
identity, the more you think that's fun
or interesting or or at least not
threatening to your own identity within
that community. I mean, you know, there
was a time in the late 90s and early
2000s where like coming out stories was
a thing where like people would share
how they told whoever was in their lives
that they were out and occasionally
popular culture would reflect that. Um,
you know, the depictions of gay life in
American popular culture, especially in
screen culture, has, you know, had a lot
of peaks and valleys and stops and
starts and qualitative dissonances.
Um, but I'm wondering if there is like
an example of a thing in American
popular culture right now that feels to
you like
ah this is this to me is a very good
example of
what things could look like if there
were no political stressors but not a
political right. Um, but also
doesn't have any shame attached to it.
Isn't about scandal in some way, but
it's just about like regular people
doing their thing who are also like like
a Buddhajge era,
[Laughter]
you know, uh, depiction of of of gay
life, like a male identified piece of
culture. But it could be anything,
right? And I mean, I don't think there's
ever a single piece of culture because
because if you pick one, instantly all
of the people who feel excluded by that
piece of culture are going to be like,
well,
this is eraser of so and so.
I watched a lot of bad lesbian movies to
help understand to help me understand
myself and I'm looking at you, Claire
the Moon.
Sex is sex.
It may be for you, but sex between women
is as raw as it gets.
Okay, I'll give you one example. I don't
and I don't want to put pressure on this
example by saying this is it. This is
the apex. But when I look at someone
like um Coleman Domingo, an out actor,
getting a best actor Oscar nomination
for playing a gay historical figure by
Rustin and then the next year getting
another best actor Oscar nomination for
playing just a completely different
charact
sing.
What part do you play
from time to time? I do act uh like we
all do. So, are you acting at all during
this interview?
I would be very wary of using that to
sort of generalize to all
example and I know exactly what you
mean.
Right. This is like, you know, forget
the Tom Cruz example. This is what we
were looking for.
You know, somebody like at the top of
his profession being it's not a coming
out story. Um it just being able to play
a variety of great roles um you know
that's
without an ostensible burden of of
representing you know an entire people.
Exactly. That's pretty great. But that
said, I want to say that I think all of
us in the community have to be wary of
something that we often do, which is we
pick the best, most advanced, most
cheerful
example of something
and we use it to tell ourselves that the
problems that precede that have been
solved. We all have to like constantly
remind ourselves that we are in gay
history in many different places at the
same time and that like the the person
who's on the leading edge of something
is not representative of the people in
the middle of the pack and the people of
the at the back of the pack who are
still really really struggling with a
lot of complicated things. We have to
extend as much grace and sympathy and
support to those people as we expend
energy cheering about the big victories
that we have.
So what I hear you saying is
y'all we got to keep coming out
100%.
We got to keep coming out. The closet is
real and it is it is as everpresent as
as the proliferation the never before
have we seen of this particular moment
in in what I'm going to reduce to
something like gay representation. We
still need stories.
I mean one person's
coming out as antiquated is another
person's I can't come out yet.
Right. Right. And those are both members
of our community.
Mark, we got to the end of the rainbow
of this conversation. We did it.
I love it.
Thanks for doing this. I appreciate
Thank you for having me on.
Like and subscribe right here on
YouTube.
[Music]